		     Roberto Bolaño's 
 $$$$$$\   $$$$$$\   $$$$$$\   $$G$$$$\  
$$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ 
\__/  $$ |$$ /  \__|$$ /  \__|$$ /  \__|
 $$$$$$  |$$$$$$$\  $$$$$$$\  $$$$$$$\  
$$  ____/ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ $$  __$$\ 
$$ |      $$ /  $$ |$$ /  $$ |$$ /  $$ |
$$$$$$$$\  $$$$$$  | $$$$$$  | $$$$$$  |
\________| \______/  \______/  \______/ 
...........................................................................

An oasis of horror in a desert of boredom
	-Charles Baudelaire


	The first time that Jean-Claude Pelletier read Benno von Archimboldi
was Christmas 1980, in Paris, when he was nineteen years old and
studying German literature.

The book in question was D'Arsonval.

The young Pelletier didn't realize at the time that the novel was part
of a trilogy (made up of the English-themed The Garden and the
Polish-themed The Leather Mask, together with the clearly
French-themed D'Arsonval), but this ignorance or lapse or
bibliographical lacuna, attributable only to his extreme youth, did
nothing to diminish the wonder and admiration that the novel stirred
in him.                           

	From that day on (or from the early morning hours when he concluded
his maiden reading) he became an enthusiastic Archimboldian and set
out on a quest to find more works by the author. This was no easy
task.

Getting hold of books by Benno von Archimboldi in the 1980s, even in
Paris, was an effort not lacking in all kinds of difficulties. Almost
no reference to Archimboldi could be found in the university's German
department. 

Pelletier's professors had never heard of him.

One said he thought he recognized the name. 

Ten minutes later, to Pelletier's outrage (and horror), he realized
that the person his professor had in mind was the Italian painter,
regarding whom he soon revealed himself to be equally ignorant.

	Pelletier wrote to the Hamburg publishing house that had published
D'Arsonval and received no response.

He also scoured the few German bookstores he could find in Paris. The
name Archimboldi appeared in a dictionary of German literature and in
a Belgian magazine devoted-whether as a joke or seriously, he never
knew- to the literature of Prussia.

In 1981 he made a trip to Bavaria with three friends from the German
department, and there, in a little bookstore in Munich, on
Voralmstrasse, he found two other books: the slim volume titled
Mitzy's Treasure, less than one hundred pages long, and the
aforementioned English novel, The Garden.

	Reading these two novels only reinforced the opinion he'd already
formed of Archimboldi.

In 1983, at the age of twenty-two, he undertook the task of
translating D'Arsonval. No one asked him to do it.

At the time, no French publishing house was interested in publishing
the German author with a funny name.

Essentially Pelletier set out to translate the book because he liked
it, and because he enjoyed the work, although it also occurred to him
that he could submit the translation prefaced with a study of the
Archimboldian oeuvre, as his thesis, and why not?- as the foundation
of his future dissertation.

	He completed the final draft of the translation in 1984, and a Paris
publishing house, after some inconclusive and contradictory readings,
accepted it and published Archimboldi. Though the novel seemed
destined from the start not tel sell more than a thousand copies, the
first printing of three thousand was exhausted after a couple of
contradictory, positive, even effusive reviews, opening the door for
second, third, and fourth printings.

	By then Pelletier had read fifteen books by the German writer,
translated two others, and was regarded almost universally as the
preeminent authority on Benno von Archimboldi across the length and
breadth of France.

  				.				

	Then Pelletier could think back on the day when he first read
Archimboldi, and he saw himself, young and poor, living in a chambre
de bonne, sharing the sink where he washed his face and brushed his 
teeth with fifteen other people who lived in the same dark garret,
shitting in a horrible and notably unhygienic bathroom that was more
like a latrine or cesspit, also shared with fifteen residents of the
garret, some of whom had already returned to the provinces, their
respective university degrees in hand, or had moved to slightly more
comfortable places in Paris itself, or were still there- just a few of
them- vegetating or slowly dying of revulsion.

	He saw himself, as we've said, ascetic and hunched over his German
dictionaries in the weak light of a single bulb, thin and dogged, as
if he were pure will made of flesh, bone, and muscle without an ounce
of fat, fanatical and bent on success.

A rather ordinary picture of a student in the capital, but it worked
on him like a drug, a drug that brought him to tears, a drug that (as
one sentimental Dutch poet of the nineteenth century had it) opened
the floodgates of emotion, as well as the floodgates of something that
at first blush resembled self-pity but wasn't (what was it, then?
rage? very likely), and made him turn over and over in his mind, not
in words but in painful images, the period of his youthful
apprenticeship, and after a perhaps pointless long night he was forced
to two conclusions: first, that his life as he had lived it so far was
over; second, that a brilliant career was opening up before him, and
that to maintain its glow he had to persist in his determination, in
sole testament to that garret. This seemed easy enough.

  				.				

	Jean-Claude Pelletier was born in 1961 and by 1986 he was already a
professor of German in Paris. Piero Morini was born in 1956, in a town
near Naples, and although he read Benno von Arcimboldi for the first
time in 1976, or four years before Pelletier, it wasn't until 1988
that he translated his first novel by the German author, Bifurcaria
Bifurcata, which came and went almost unnoticed in Italian bookstores.

	Archimboldi's situation in Italy, it must be said, was very different
from his situation in France, for one thing, Morini wasn't his first
translator. 

As it happened, the first novel by Archimboldi to fall into Morini's
hands was a translation ofone by someone called
Colossimo for Einaudi in 1969. 

In Italy,  The Leather Mask was followed by Rivers of Europe in 1971,
Inheritance in 1973, and railroad perfection in 1975; earlier in 1964,
a publishing house in Rome had put out a collection of mostly war
stories, titled The Berlin Underworld. 

So it could be said that Archimboldi wasn't a complete unknown in
Italy, although one could hardly claim that he was successful, or
somewhat successful, or even barely successful.

In point of fact, he was an utter failure, an author whose books
languished on the dustiest shelves in the stores or were remaindered
or forgotten in publishers' warehouses before being pulped.

	Morini of course, was undaunted by the scant interest that
Archimboldi's work aroused in the Italian public, and after he
translated Bifurcaria Bifurcata he wrote two studies of Archimboldi
for journals in Milan and Palermo, one on the role of fate in Railroad
Perfection, and other on the various guises of conscience and guilt in
Lethaea, on the surface an erotic novel, and in Bitzius, a novel less
than one hundred pages long, similar in some ways to Mitzi's Treasure,
the book that Pelletier had found in an old Munich bookstore, and that
told the story of Albert Bitzius, a pastor of Lützelflüh, in the
canton of Bern, an author of sermons as well as writer under the
pseudonym Jeremiah Gotthelf. 

Both pieces were published, and Morini's eloquence or powers of
seduction in presenting the figure of Archimboldi overcame all
obstacles, and in 1991 a second translation by Piero Morini, this time
of Saint Thomas, was published in Italy. By then, Morini was teaching
German literature at the university of Turin, the doctors had
diagnosed him with multiple sclerosis, and he had suffered the strange
and spectacular accident that left him permanently wheelchair bound.

  				.				

Manuel Espinoza came to Archimboldi by a different route. Younger than
Morini and Pelletier, Espinoza studied spanish literature, not German
literature, at least for the first two years of his university career,
among other sad reasons because he dreamed of being a writer. The only
German authods he was (barely) familiar with were three greats:
Hölderlin, because at sixteen he thought he was feted to be a poet and
he devoured every book of poetry he could find; Goethe, because in his
final year of secondary school a teacher with a humorous streak
recommended that he read The Sorrows of Young Werther, in whose hero
he would find a kindered spirit; and Schiller, because he had read one
of his plays.

Later he would discover the work of a modern author, Jünger, with whom
he became acquainted more by osmosis than anything else, since the
Madrid writers he admired (and deep down hated bitterly) talked
nonstop about Jünger.

So it could be said that Espinoza was acquainted with just one German
author, and that author was Jünger.

At first he thought Jünger's, work was magnificent, and since many of
the writer's books were translated in Spanish, Espinoza had no trouble
finding them and reading them all.

He would have preferred it to be less easy.

Meanwhile, many of his acquaintances weren't just Jünger devotees;
some of them were the author's translators, too, which was something
Espinoza cared little about, since the glory he covered was that of
the writer, not the translator.

	As the months and years went by, silently and cruelly, as is
often the case, Espinoza suffered some misfortunes that made him
change his thinking. It didn't take long, for example, to discover
that the group of Jüngerians wasn't as Jüngerian as he had thought,
being instead, like all literary groups in thrall to the changing
seasons.

In the fall, it's true, they were Jüngerians, but in winter they
suddenly turend to Barojians and in spring to Orteganites, and in
summer they would even leave the bar where they met to go out in the
street and intone pastoral verse in honor of Camilo José Cela,
something that the young Espinoza, who was fudamentally patriotic,
could have been prepared to accept unconditionally if such displays
had been embarked on in a fun-loving carnivalesque spirit, but who
could in no way take it all seriously, as did the bogus Jüngerians.

	Worse was discovering what the members of the group thought
about his own attempts at fiction. Their opinion was so negative that
there were times-some nights, for example, when he couldn't sleep-that
he began to wonder in all seriousness whether they were making a
veiled attempt to get him to go away, stop bothering them, never show
his face again.
	And even worse was when Jünger showed up in person in Madrid
and the group of Jüngerians , organized a trip to El Escorial for him 
(a strange whim of the maestro, visiting El Escorial), and when Espinoza 
tried to join the excursion in any capacity whatsoever, he was denied the honor, 
as if the Jüngerians deemed him unworthy of making up part of the German's 
garde du corps, or as if they feared that he, Espinoza, might embarrass them 
with some naïve, abstruse remark, although the official explanation
given (perhaps dictated by some charitable impulse) was that he didn't
speak German and everyone else who was going on the picnic with Jünger
did.

   				.				

That was the end of Espinoza's dealings with the Jüngerians. And it
was the beginning of is loneliness and a steady stream (or deluge) of
resolutions, often contradictory or impossible to keep.

These weren't comfortable nights, much less pleasant ones, but
Espinoza discovered two things that helped him mightily in the early
days: he would never be a fiction writer, and, in his own way, he was
brave.

	He also discovered that he was bitter and full of resentment,
that he oozed resentment, and that he might easily kill someone,
anyone, if it would provide a respite from the loneliness and rain and
cold of Madrid, but this was a discovery that he preferred to conceal.

Instead he concentrated on his realization that he would never be a
writer and on making everything he possibly could out of his newly
unearthed bravery.

	He continued at the university, studying Spanish literature,
but at the same time he enrolled in the German department. 

He slept four or five hours a night and the rest of the time he spent on his
desk. 

Before he finished his degree in German literature he wrote a
twenty-page essay ion the relationship between Werther and music,
which was published in a Madrid literary magazine and a Göttingen
university journal.

By the time he was twenty-five he had completed both degrees. 

In 1990, he received his doctorate in German literature with a
dissertation on Benno von Archimboldi.

A Barcelona publishing house brought it out one year later.

By then, Espinoza was a regular at German literature conferences and
roundtables.

His command of German was, if not excellent, more than passable. 

He also spoke English and French. 

Like Morini and Pelletier, he had a good job and a substantial income,
and he was respected (to the extent possible) by his students as well
as his colleagures. 

He never translated Archimboldi or any other German author.

   				.				

Besides Archimboldi, there was one thing Morini, Pelletier, and
Espinoza had in common. 

All three had iron wills.

Actually, they had one other thing in common, but we'll get to that
later.

	Liz Norton, on the other hand, wasn't what one would
ordinarily call a woman of great drive, which is to say that she
didn't draw up long- or medium-term plans and throw herself
wholeheartedly into their execution.

She had none of the attributes of the ambitious.

When she suffered, her pain was clearly visibe, and when she was
happy, the happiness she felt was contagious. 

She was incapable of setting herself a goal and striving steadily
towards it.

At least, no goal was appealing or desirable enough for her to pursue
it unreservedly.

Used in a personal sense, the phrase "achieve an end" seemed to her a
small-minded snare.

She preferred the word life, and, on rare occasions happiness.

If volition is bound to social imperatives, as William James believed,
and it's therefore easier to go to war than it is to quit smoking, one
could say that Liz Norton was a woman who found it easier to quit
smoking than to go to war.

	This was something she'd been told once when she was a
student, and she loved it, although it didn't make her read William
James, then or ever. 

For her, reading was directly linked to pleasure, not to knowledge or
enigmas or constructions or verbal labyrinths as Morini, Espinoza,
and Pelletier believed it to be.

	Her discovery of Archimboldi was the least traumatic of all,
and the least poetic. During the three months that she lived in Berlin
in 1988, when she was twenty, a German friend loaned her aaa novel by
an author she had never heard of. 

The name puzzled her.

How was it possible, she asked her friend, that there could be a
German writer with an Italian surname but with a von preceding it,
indicating some kkind of nobility?

Her German friend had no answer.

It was probably a pseudonym, he said.

And to make things even stranger, he added, masculine proper names
ending in vowels were uncommon in Germany.

Plenty of of feminine proper names ended that way but certainly not
masculine proper names.

The novel was The Blind Woman, and she liked it, but not so much that
made her go running out to buy everything else that Benno von
Archimboldi had ever written.


   				.				


Five months later, back in England again, Liz Norton received a gift
in the mail from her German frien. 

As one might guess, it was another novel by Archimboldi.

She read it, liked it, went to her college library to look for more
books by the German with the Italian name, and founf two: one was the
book she had already read in Berlin, and the other was Bitzius.

Reading the latter really did make her go running out.

It was raining in the quadrangle, and the quadrangular sky looked like
the grimace of a robot or a god made in our own likeness.

The oblique drops rain slid down the blades of grass in the park, but
it would have made no difference had they slid up.

Then the oblique (drops) turned round (drops), swallowed up by the
earth underpinning the grass, and the grass and the earth seemed to
talk, no, not talk, argue, their incomprehensible words like
crystallized spiderwebs or the briefest crystallized vomitings, a
barely audible rustling, as if instead of drinking tea that afternoon,
Norton had drunk a steaming cup of peyote.

	But the truth is that she had only had tea to drink and
she felt overwhelmed, as if a voice were repeating a terrible prayer in
her ear, the words of which blurred as she walked away from the
college, and the rain wetted her skirt and bony knees and pretty
ankles and little else, because before Liz Norton went running through
the park, she hadn't forgotten to pick up her umbrella.

   				.				

The first time Pelletier, Morini, Espinoza, and Norton saw each other
was at a contemporary German literature conference held in Bremen in
1994.

Pelletier and Morini had met before, during the German literature
colloquiums held in Leipzig in 1989, when GDR was in death throes, and
then they saw each other again at the German literature symposium held
in Mannheim in December of the same year (a disaster, with bad hotels,
bad food, and abysmal organizing).

At a modern German literature forum in Zurich in 1990, Pelletier and
Morini met Espinoza.

Espinoza saw Pelletier again at a twentieth-century German literature
congress held in Maastricht in 1991 (Pelletier delivered a paper
titled "Heine and Archimboldi: Converging Paths"; Espinoza delivered a
paper titled "Ernst Jünger and Benno von Archimboldi: DIverging
Paths"), and it could more or less be safely said that from that
moment on they not only read each other in scholarly journals, they
became friends, or they struck up something like a friendship.

In 1992, Pelletier, Espinoza, and Morini ran into each other again at
a German literature seminar in Augsburg.

Each was presenting a paper on Archimboldi.

For a few months it had been rumored that Benno von Archimboldi himself
planned to attend this grand event, which would convene not only the
usual Germanists but also a sizable group of German writers and poets,
and yet at the crucial moment, two days before the gathering, a
telegram was received from the Archimboldi's Hamburg publishers
tendering his apologies.

In every other respect, too, the conference was a failure.

In Pelletier's opinion, perhaps the only thing of interest was a
lecture given by an old professor from Berlin on the work of Arno
Schmidt (here we have a German proper name ending in a vowel), a
judgement shared by Espinoza and, to a lesser extent, by Morini.

	They spent the free time they had, which was ample, strolling
the paltry (in Pelletier's opinion) sites of interest in Augsburg, a
city that Espinoza also found paltry, and that Morini found only
moderately paltry, but still paltry in the final analysis, while
Espinoza and Pelletier took turns pushing the Italian's wheelchair
since Morini wasn't in the best of health this time, but rather in
paltry health, so that his two friends and colleagues considered that
a little bit of fresh air would do him no harm, and in fact might do
him good.

	Only Pelletier and Espinoza attended the next German
literature conference, held in Paris in January 1992. 

Morini, who had been invited too, was in worse health than usual just
then, causing his doctor to advise him, among other things, to avoid
even short trips.

It wasn't a bad conference, and despite their full schedules, Pelletier
and Espinoza fond time to eat together at a little restaurant on the
Rue Galande, near Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre, where, besides talking about
their respective projects and interests, during dessert they
speculated about the health (the ill health, the delicate health, the
miserable health) of the melancholy Italian, ill health that
nevertheless hadn't prevented him from beginning a book on
Archimboldi, a book that might be a grand Archimboldian opus, the
pilot fish that would swim for a long time beside the great black
shark of the German's oeuvre, or so Pelletier explained that Morini
had told him on the phone, whether seriously or in jest he wasn't
sure.

Both Pelletier and Espinoza respected Morini's work, but Pelletier's
words (spoken as if from inside an old castle or a dungeon dug under
the moat of an old castle) sounded like a threat in the peaceful
little restaurant on the Rue Galande and hastened the end of an
evening that had begin in an atmosphere or cordiality an contentment.

   				.			

None of this soured Pelletier's and Espinoza's relations with Morini.

	The three met again at a German-language literature colloquium
held in Bologna in 1993. 

And all three contributed to the Number 46 of the Berlin journal
Literary Studies, a monograph devoted to the work of Archimboldi.

It wasn't the first time they'd contributed to the journal.

In Number 44, there'd been a piece by Espinoza on the idea of God in
the work of Archimboldi and Unamuno, 

In Number 38, Morini had published an article on the state of German
literature instruction in Italy.

And in Number 37, Pelletier had presented an overview of the most
important German writers of the twentieth century in France and
Europe, a text that incidentally sparked more than one protest and
even a couple of scoldings.

	Bit it's Number 46 that mattes to us, since not only did it
mark the formation of two opposing groups of Archimboldians-Pelletier,
Morini, and Espinoza versus Schwarz, Borchmeyer, and Pohl-it also
contained a piece by Liz Norton, incredibly brilliant, according to
Pelletier, well argued, according to Espinoza, interesting, according
to Morini, a piece, that aligned itself (and not at anyone's bidding)
with the theses of the three friends, whom it cited on various
occasions, demonstrating a thorough knowledge of their studies and
monographs published in specialized journals or issued by small
presses.

	Pelletier thought about writing her a letter, but in the end
he didn't.

Espinoza called Pelletier and asked whether it wouldn't be a good idea
to get in touch with her.

Unsure, they decided to ask Morini.

Morini abstained from comment.

All they knew about Liz Norton was that she taught German literature
at the university of London. 

And that, unlike them, she wasn't a full professor.

   				.			

The Bremen German literature conference was highly eventful.

Pelletier, backed by Morini and Espinoza, went on the attack like
Napoleon at at Jena,assaulting the unsuspecting German Archimboldi
scholars, and the downed flags of Pohl, Schwarz, and Borchmeyer, were
soon routed to the cafès and taverns of Bremen.

The young German professors participating in the event were bewildered
at first and then took the side of Pelletier and his friend, albeit
cautiously.

The audience, consisting mostly of university students who had
traveled from Göttingen by train or in vans, was also won over by
Pelletier's fiery and uncompromising interpretations, throwing caution
to the winds and enthusiastically yielding to the festive, Dionysian
vision of ultimate carnival (or penultimate carnival) exegesis upheld
by Pelletier and Espinoza.

Two days later, Schwarz and his minions counterattacked.

TThey compared Archimboldi to Heinrich Böll.

They spoke of suffering.

They compared Archimboldi to Günter Grass.

They spoke of civic duty.

Borchmeyer even compared Archimboldi to Friedrich Dürrenmatt and spoke
of humor, which seemed to Morini the height of gall.

Then Liz Norton appeared, heaven sent, and demolished the
counterattack like a Desaix, like a Lannes, a blond Amazon who spoke
excellent German, if anything too rapidly, and who exponded on
Grimmelshausen and Gryphius and many others, including Theophrastus
Bombastus von Hehenheim, better known as Paracelsus.

That same night they ate together in a long, narrow tavern near the
river, on a dark street flanked by old Hanseatic buildings, some of
which looked like abandoned Nazi offices, a tavern they reached by
going down stairs wet from drizzle.

	The place couldn't have been more awful, thought Liz Norton,
but the evening was long and agreeable, and the friendliness of
Pelletier, Morini, and Espinoza, who weren't standoffish at all, made
her feel at ease.

Naturally, she was familiar with most of their work, but what
surprised her (pleasantly, of course) was that they were familiar with
some of hers, too. 

The conversation proceeded in four stages: first they laughed about
the flaying Norton had given Borchmeyer and about Borchmeyer's growing
dismay at Norton's increasingly ruthless attacks, then they talked
about future conferences, especially a strange one at the University
of Minnesota, supposedly to be attended by five hundred professors,
translators, and German literature specialists, though Morini had a
reason  to believe the whole thing was a hoax, then they discussed,
Benno von Archimboldi and his life, about which so little was known. 

All of them, from Pelletier to Morini (who was talkative that night,
though he was usually the quietest), reviewed anecdotes and gossip,
compared old, vague information for the umpteenth time, and speculated
about the secret of the great, writer's whereabouts and life like
people endlessly analyzing a favorite movie, and finally, as they
walked the wet, bright streets (bright only intermittently, as if
Bremen were a machine jolted every so often by brief, powerful
electric charges), they talked about themselves.

	All four were single and that struck them as an encouraging
sign. All four lived alone, although Liz Norton sometimes shared her
London flat with a globe-trotting brother who worked for an NGO and
who came back to England only a few times a year.

All four were devoted to their careers, although Pelletier, Espinoza,
and Morini had doctorates whereas Norton was just preparing her
dissertation and had no expectation of becoming the head o her
university's German department.

	That night, before he fell asleep, Pelletier didn't think back
on the squabbles at the conference. 

Instead he thought about walking along the streets near the river and
about Liz Norton walking beside him as Espinoza pushed Morini's
wheelchair and the four of them laughed at the little animals from
Bremen, which watched them or watched their shadows on the pavement
while mounted harmoniously, innocently, on each other's backs.

				.				


From that day or that night on, not a week went by without the four of
them calling back and forth regularly, sometimes at the oddest hours,
without a thought for the phone bill.

	Sometimes it was Liz Norton who would call Espinoza and ask
about Morini, whom she'd talked to the day before and whom she thought
seemed a little depressed.

That same day Espinoza would call Pelletier and inform that according
to Norton, Morini's health had taken a turn for the worse, to which
Pelletier would respond by immediately calling Morini, asking him
bluntly how he was, laughing with him (because Morini did his best
never to talk seriously about his condition), exchanging a few
unimportant remarks about work, and later telephoning Norton, maybe at
midnight, after putting off the pleasure of the call with a frugal and
exquisite dinner, and assuring her that as far as could be hoped,
Morini was fine, normal, stable, and what Norton had taken for
depression was just the Italian's natural state, sensitive as he was
to changes in the weather (maybe the weather had been bad in Turin,
maybe Morini had dreamed who knows what kind of horrible dream the
night before), thus ending a cycle that would begin a day later, or
two days later, with Morini calling Espinoza for no reason, just to
say hello, that was all, to talk for a while, the call invariably
taken up with unimportant things, remarks about the weather (as if
Morini and even Espinoza were adopting British conversational habits),
film recommendations, dispassionate commentary on recent books, in
short, a generally soporific or at best listless conversation, but one
that Espinoza followed with odd enthusiasm, or feigned enthusiasm, or
fondness, or at least civilized interest, and that Morini attended to
as if his life depended on it, and which was succeeded two days or a
few hours later by Espinoza calling Norton and having a conversation
along essentially the same lines, and Norton calling Pelletier, and
Pelletier calling Morini, with the whole process starting again days
later, the call transmuted into hyperspecialized code, signifier and
signified in Archimboldi, text, subtext, and paratext, reconquest of
the verbal and physical territoriality in the pages of Bitzius, which
under the circumstances was the same as talking about film or problems
in German department or the clouds that passed incessantly over their
respective cities, morning to night.

				.				

They met again at the postwar European literature colloquium held in
Avignon at the end of 1994. Norton and Morini went as spectators,
although their trips were funded by their universities, and Pelletier
and Espinoza presented papers on the import of Archimboldi's work.

Pelletier's paper focused on insularity, on the rupture that seemed to
separate the whole of Archimboldi's oeuvre from the German tradition,
though not from a larger European tradition.

Espinoza's paper, one of the most engaging he ever wrote, revolved
around the mystery veiling the figure of Archimboldi, about whom
virtually no one, not even his publisher, knew anything: his books
appeared with no author photograph on the flaps or back cover; his
biographical data was minimal (German writer born in Prussia in 1920);
his place of residence was a mystery, although at some point his
publisher let slip in front of a Spiegel reporter that one of his
manuscripts had arrived from Sicily; none of his surviving fellow
writers had ever seen him; no biography of him existed in German even
though sales of his books were rising in Germany as well as in the
rest of Europe and even in the United States, which likes vanished
writers (vanished writers or millionaire writers) or the legend of
vanished writers, and where his work was beginning to circulate
widely, no longer just in German departments but on campus and off
campus, in the vast cities with a love for the oral and visual arts.

				.				

At night Pelletier, Morini, Espinoza, and Norton would have dinner
together, sometimes accompanies by one or two German professors whom
they'd known for a long time, and who would usually retire early to
their hotels or stay until the end of the evening but remain
discreetly in the background, as if they understood that the
four-cornered figure formed by the Archimboldians was inviolable and
also liable to react violently to  any outside interference at that
hour of the night.

By the end it was always just the four of them walking the streets of
Avignon, as blithely and happily as they'd walked the grimy,
bureaucratic streets of Bremen and as they would walk the many streets
awaiting them in the future, Norton pushing Morini with Pelletier to
her left and Espinoza to her right, or Pelletier pushing Morini with
Espinoza to his left and Norton walking backward ahead of them and
laughing with all the might of her twenty six years, a magnificent
laugh that were quick to imitate although they would surely have
preferred not to laugh but just to look at her, or the four of them
abreast and halted beside the low wall of storied river, in other
words a river tamed, talking bout their German obsession without
interrupting one another, testing and savoring one another's
intelligence, with long intervals of silence that not even the rain
could disturb.

				.				

When Pelletier returned from Avignon at the end of 1994, when he
opened the door to his apartment in Paris and set his bag on the floor
and closed the door, when he poured himself a glass of whiskey and
opened the drapes and saw the usual view, a slice of the Place de
Breteuil with the UNESCO building in the background, when he took off
his jacket and left the whiskey in the kitchen and listened to the
messages on the answering maching, when he felt drowsiness, heaviness
in his eyelids, but instead of getting into bed and going to sleep he
undressed and took a shower, when wrapped in a white bathrobe that
reached almost to his ankles he turned on the computer, only then did
he realize that he missed Liz Norton and that he would have given
anything to be with her at that moment, not just talking to her but in
bed with her, telling her that he loved her and hearing from her lips
that she loved him too.

	Espinoza experienced something similar, though slightly
different in two respects. First, the need to be near Liz Norton
struck some time before he got back to his apartment in Madrid. By the
time he was on the plane he'd realized that she was the perfect woman,
the one he'd always hoped to find, and he began to suffer. Second,
among the ideal images of Norton that passed at supersonic speed
through his head as the plane flew toward Spain at four hundred miles
an hour, there were more sex scenes than Pelletier had imagined. Not
many more, but more.

	Meanwhile, Morini, who traveled by train from Avignon to
Turin, spent the trip reading the cultural supplement of Il Manifesto,
and then he slept until a couple of ticket collectors (who would help
him onto the platform in his wheelchair) let him know that they'd
arrived.

	As for what passed through Liz Norton's head, it's better not
to say.
				.				

Still, the friendship of the four Archimboldians continued in the same
fashion as ever, unshakable, shaped by a greater force the that the
four didn't resist, even though it meant relegating their personal
desires to the background.

	In 1995 they met at a panel discussion on contemporary German
literature held in Amsterdam, a discussion within the framework of a
larger discussion that was taking place in the same building (although
in separate lecture halls), encompassing French, English, and Italian
literature.

	It goes without saying that most of the attendees of these
curious discussions gravitated toward the hall where contemporary
English literature was being discussed, next door to the German
literature hall and separated from it by a wall that was clearly not
made of stone, as walls used to be, but of fragile bricks, covered
with a thin layer of plaster, so that the shouts, howls, and
especially the applause sparked by English literature could be heard
in the German literature room as if the two talks or dialogues were
one, or as if the Germans were being mocked, when not drowned out, by
the English, not to mention by the massive audience attending the
English (or Anglo-Indian) discussion, notably larger than the sparse
and earnest audience attending the German discussion Which in the final
analysis was a good thing, because it's common knowledge that a
conversation involving only a few people, with everyone listening to
everyone else and taking the time to think and not shouting, tends to
be more productive or at least more relaxed than a mass conversation,
which runs the permanent risk of becoming a rally, or, because of the
necessary brevity of the speeches, a series of slogan that fade as
soon as they're put into words.

	But before coming to the crux of the matter, or of the
discussion, a rather petty detail that nonetheless affected the course
of events must be noted. On a last-minute whim, the organizers- the
same people who'd left out contemporary Spanish and Polish and Swedish
literature for lack of time or money- earmarked most of the funds to
provide luxurious accommodations for the stars of English literature,
and with the money left over they brought in three French novelists,
an Italian poet, an Italian short story writer, and three German
writers, the first two of them novelists from West and East Berlin,
now reunified, both vaguely renowned (and both of whom arrived in
Amsterdam by train and made no complaint when they were put in a
three-star hotel), and the third, a rather shadowy figure, about whom
no one knew anything, not even Morini, who, presenter or not, knew
quite a bit about contemporary German literature.

	And when the shadowy writer, who was Swabian, began to
reminisce during his talk (or discussion) about his stint as a
journalist, as an editor of arts pages, as an interviewer of all kinds
of writers and artists wary of interviews, and then begun to recall
the era in which he had served as a cultural promoter for a Frisian
town, north of Wilhelmshaven, facing  the North Sea coast and the East
Frisian islands, a place where it was cold, very cold, and even wetter
than it was cold, with a salty wetness that got into the bones, and
there were only two ways of making it through the winter, one,
drinking until you got cirrhosis, and two, listening to music (usually
amateur string quartets) in the town hall auditorium or talking to
writers who came from elsewhere and who were given very little, a room
at the only boardinghouse in town and a few marks to cover the return
trip by train, those trains so unlike German trains today, but on
which the people were perhaps more talkative, more polite, more
interested in their neighbours, but anyway, writers who, after being
paid and subtracting transportation costs, left these places and went
home (which was sometimes just a room in Frankfurt or Cologne) with a
little money and possibly a few books sold, in the case of those
writers or poets (especially poets) who, after reading a few pages and
answering the townspeople's questions, would set up a table and make a
few extra marks, a fairly profitable activity back then, because if
the audience liked what the writer had read, of if the reading moved
them or entertained them or made them think, then they would buy one
of his books, sometimes to keep as a souvenir of a pleasant evening,
as the wind whistled along the narrow streets of the Frisian town,
cutting into the flesh it was so cold, sometimes to read or reread a
poem or story, back at home now, weeks after the event, maybe by the
light of an oil lamp because there wasn't always electricity, of
course, since the war had just ended and there were still gaping
wounds, social and economic, anyway, more or less the same literary
reading today, with the exception that the books displayed on the
table were self-published and now it's the publishing houses that set
up the table, and one of these writers who came to the town where the
Swabian was cultural promoter was Benno von Archimboldi, a writer of
the stature of Gustav Heller or Rainer Kuhl or Wilhelm Frayn (writers
whom Morini would later look up in his encyclopedia of German writers,
without success), and he didn't bring books, and he read two chapters
from a novel in progress, his second novel, the first, remembered the
Swabian, had been published in Hamburg that year, although he didn't
read anything from it, but that first novel did exist, said the
Swabian, and Archimboldi, as if anticipating doubts, had bought a copy
with him, a little novel about one hundred pages long, maybe longer,
one hundred and twenty, one hundred and twenty-five pages, and he
carried the novel in his jacket pocket, and, strangely, the Swabian
remembered Archimboldi's jacket more clearly than the novel crammed
into its pocket, a little novel with a dirty, creased cover that had
once been deep ivory or a pale wheat color or gold shading into
invisibility, but now was colorless and dull, just the title of the
novel and the author's name and the colophon of the publishing house,
whereas the jacket was unforgettable, a black leather jacket with a
high collar, providing excellent protection against the snow and rain
and cold, loose fitting, so it could be worn over heavy sweaters or
two sweaters without anyone noticing, with horizontal pockets on each
side, and a row of four buttons, neither very large nor very small,
sewn on with something like fishing line, a jacket that brought to
mind, why I don't know, jackets worn by some Gestapo officers,
although back then black leather jackets were in fashion and anyone
who had the money to buy one or had inherited one wore it without
stopping to think what it suggested, and the writer who had come to
that Frisian town was Benno von Archimboldi, the young Benno von
Archimboldi, twenty nine or thirty years old, and it had been he, the
Swabian who had gone to wait for him to city hall, where Archimboldi
hadn't set up any table and had read two chapters from a novel that
wasn't finished yet, and then the Swabian had gone to dinner with him
at the local tavern, along with the teacher and a widow who preferred
music or painting to literature, but who, once resigned to not having
music or painting, was in no way averse to a literary evening, and it
was she who somehow or the other kept up the conversation during
dinner (sausages and potatoes and beer: neither the times, recalled
the Swabian, nor the town's budget allowed for anything more
extravagant), although it might be truer to say that she steered it
with a firm hand on the rudder, and the men who were around the table,
the mayor's secretary, a man in the salted fish business, an old
schoolteacher who kept falling asleep even with his fork in his hand,
and a town employee, a very nice boy named Fritz who was a good friend
of the Swabian's, nodded or were careful not to contradict the
redoubtable widow whose knowledge of the arts was much greater than
anyone else's, even the Swabian's, and who had traveled in Italy and
France and had even, on one of her voyages, an unforgettable ocean
crossing, gone as far as Buenos Aires, in 1927 or 1928, when the city
was a meat emporium and the refrigerator ships left port laden with
tons of meat headed all over the world, and when she, the lady, went
out on deck, say at night, half asleep or seasick or ailing, all she
had to do was lean on the rail and let her eyes grow accustomed to the
dark and then the view of the port was startling and it instantly
cleared away any vestiges of sleep or seasickness or other ailments,
the nervous system having no choice but to surrender unconditionally
to such a picture, the parade of immigrants like ants loading the flesh
of thousands of dead cattle into the ships' holds, the movements of
pallets poled with the meat of thousands of sacrificed calves, and the
gauzy tint that shaded every corner of the port from dawn until dusk
and even during the night shift, the red of barely cooked steak, of
T-bones, of filet, of ribs grilled rare, terrible, thank goodness the
lady, who wasn't a widow at the time, had to see it only the first
night, then they disembarked and took rooms at one of the most
expensive hotels in Buenos Aires, and the went to the opera and then
to a ranch where her husband, an expert horseman, agreed to race with
the rancher's son, a little sixteen year-old-gaucho, thin as a reed
and with bright eyes, so bright that when the lady looked at him he
lowered his head and then lifted it a little and gave her such a
wicked look that she was offended, what an insolent urchin, while her
husband laughed and said in German: you've made quite an impression on
the boy, a joke the lady didn't find the least bit funny, and then the
little gaucho mounted his horse and they set off, the boy could really
gallop, he clung to the horse so tightly it was as if were glued ti
its neck, and he sweated and thrashed it with his whip, but in the end
her husband won the race, he hadn't been captain of a cavalry regiment
for nothing, and the rancher and the rancher's son got up from their
seats and clapped, good losers, and the rest of the guests clapped
too, excellent rider, this German, extraordinary rider, although when
the little gaucho reached the finish line, or in other words the
porch, he didn't look like a good loser, a dark, angry expression on
his face, his head down, and while the men, speaking French, scattered
along the porch in search in search of glasses of ice-cold champagne,
the lady went up to the little gaucho, who was left standing alone,
holding his horse's reins in his left hand (at the other end of the
long yard the little gaucho's father headed off toward the stables
with the horse the German had ridden), and told him, in an
incomprehensible language, not to be sad, that he had ridden an
excellent race but her husband was good too and more experienced,
words that to the little gaucho sounded like the moon, like the
passage of clouds across the moon like a slow storm, and then the
little gaucho looked up at the lady with the eyes of a bird of prey,
ready to plunge a knife into her at the navel and slice up to the
breasts, cutting her wide open, his eyes shining with a strange
intensity, like the eyes of a clumsy young butcher, as the lady
recalled, which didn't stop her from following him without protest
when he took her by the hand and led her to the other side of the
house, to a place where a wrought-iron pergola stood, bordered by
flowers and trees that the lady had never seen in her life or which at
that moment she thought she had never seen in her life, and she even
saw a fountain in the park, a stone fountain, in the center of which,
balanced on one little foot, a creole cherub with smiling features
danced, part European and part cannibal, perpetually bathed by three
jets of water that spouted at its feet, a fountain sculpted from a
single piece of black marble, a fountain that the lady and the little
gaucho admired at length, until a distant cousin of the rancher
appeared (or a mistress whom the rancher had lost in deep folds of
memory), telling her in brusque and serviceable English that her
husband had been looking for her for some time, and then the lady
walked out of the enchanted park on the distant cousin's arm, and the
little gaucho called to her, or so she thought, and when she turned he
spoke a few hissing words, and the lady stroked his head and asked the
cousin what the little gaucho had said, her fingers lost in the thick
curls of his hair, and the cousin seemed to hesitate for a moment, but
the lady, who wouldn't tolerate lies or half-truths, demanded an
immediate, direct translation, and the cousin said: he says ... he
says the boos ... arranged it so your husband would win the last two
races, and then the cousin was quiet and the little gaucho went off
toward the other end of the park, dragging on his horse's reins, and
the lady rejoined the party but she couldn't stop thinking about what the
little gaucho had said at the last moment, the sainted lamb, and no
matter how much she thought, his words were still a riddle, a riddle
that lasted the rest of the party, and tormented her as she tossed and
turned in bed, unable to sleep, and made her listless the next day
during a long horseback ride and barbecue, and followed her back to
Buenos Aires and all through the days she was at the hotel or went out
to receptions at the German embassy or the English embassy or the
Ecuadorean embassy, and was solved only days after her ship set sail
for Europe, one night, at four in the morning, when the lady went out
to stroll the deck, not knowing or caring what parallel or longitude
they were at, surrounded or partially surrounded by forty-one million
square miles of salt water, just then, as the lady lit a cigarette on
the first-class passengers' first deck, with her eyes fixed on the
expanse of ocean that she couldn't see but could hear, the riddle was
miraculously solved, and it was then, at that point in the story, said
the Swabian, that the lady, the once rich, powerful and intelligent
(in her fashion, at least) Frisian lady, fell silent, and a religious,
or worse, a superstitious hush fell over that sad postwar German
tavern, where everyone began to feel more and more uncomfortable and
hurried to mop up what was left of their sausages and potatoes and
swallow the last drops of beer from their mugs, as if they were afraid
that at any moment the lady would begin to howl like a Fury and they
judged it wise to prepare themselves to face the cold journey home
with full stomachs.

And then the lady spoke. She said:

"Can anyone solve the riddle?"

That's what she said, but she didn't look at any of the townspeople or
address them directly.

"Does anyone know the answer to this riddle? Does anyone understand
it? Is there by chance a man in this town who can tell me the
solution, even if he has to whisper it in my ear?"

She said all of this with her eyes on her plate, where her sausage and
her serving of potatoes remained almost untouched.

	And then Archimboldi, who had kept his head down, eating, as
the lady talked, said, without raising his voice, that it had been an
act of hospitality, that the rancher and his son were sure the lady's
husband would lose the first race, and they had rigged the second and
third races so the former cavalry caption would win.

Then the lady looked him in the eye and laughed and asked why her
husband had won the first race.

"Why? why?", asked the lady.

"Because the rancher's son," said Archimboldi, "who surely rode better
and had a better mount than your husband, was overcome at the last
minute by selflessness.

In other words, he chose extravagance, carried away by the impromptu
festivities that he and his father had arranged.

Everything had to be squandered, including his victory, and somehow
everyone understood it had to be that way, including the woman who
came looking for you in the park. Everyone except the little gaucho."

"Was that all?" asked the lady.

"Not for the little gaucho. If you'd spent any longer with him, I
think he would have killed you, which would have been an extravagant
gesture in its own right, though certainly not the kind that the
rancher and his some had in mind."

	Then the lady got up, thanked everyone for a pleasant evening,
and left.

	"A few minutes later," said the Swabian, "I walked Archimboldi
back to the boardinghouse. The next morning, when I went to get him to
take him to the station, he was gone."

				.				


Astounding Swabian, said Espinoza. I want him all to myself, said
Pelletier. Try not to overwhelm him, try not to seem too interested,
said Morini. We have to treat the man with kid gloves, said Norton.
Which means we have to be very nice to him.


				.	
			
But the Swabian had already said everything he had to say, and even
though they coddled him and talked to him about hospitality and
extravagance and the fate of cultural promoters trapped in small
provincial towns, it was impossible to get anything interesting out
of him, although the four were careful to record every word he spoke,
as if they'd met their Moses, a detail that didn't go unnoticed by the
Swabian and in fact heightened his shyness, (which according to
Espinoza and Pelletier was such an unusual trait in a former cultural
promoter that they thought the Swabian must be some kind of imposter),
his reserve, his discretion which verged on the improbable omertà of
an old Nazi who smells danger.

 				.				

Fifteen days later, Espinoza and Pelletier took a few days' leave and
went to Hamburg to visit Archimboldi's publisher. 

They were received by the editor in chief, a thin, upright man in his
sixties by the name of Schnell, which means quick, although Schnell
was on the slow side.

He had sleek dark brown hair, sprinkled with gray at the temples,
which only accentuated his appearance. When he got up to shake hands,
it occurred to both Espinoza and Pelletier that he must be gay.

	"That faggot is the closest thing to an eel I have ever seen,"
Espinoza said afterward, as they strolled through Hamburg.

	Pelletier chided him for his comment, with its markedly
homophobic overtones, although deep down he agreed, there was
something eellike about Schnell, something of the fish that swims in
the dark, muddy waters.

	Of course, there was little Schnell could tell them that they
didn't already know. He had never seen Archimboldi, and the money, of
which there was more and more, was deposited in a Swiss bank account. 

Once every two years, instructions were received from the writer, the
letters usually postmarked Italy, although there were also letters in
the publisher's files with Greek and Spanish and Moroccan stamps,
letters, incidentally, that were addressed to Mrs. Bubis, the owner of
the publishing house, and that he, naturally, hadn't read.

	"There are only two people left here , besides Mrs. Bubis, of
course, who've met Benno von Archimboldi in person," Schnell told
them. 

"The publicity director and the copy chief. By the time I came to work
here, Archimboldi had long since vanished."

	Pelletier and Espinoza asked to speak to both women. The
publicity director's office was full of plants and photographs, not
necessarily of the house authors, and the only thing she could tell
them about the vanished writer was that he was a good person.
	
	"A tall man, very tall," she said. "When he walked bside the
late Mr. Bubis they looked like a ti. Or a li."

	Espinoza and Pelletier didn't understand what she meant and
the publicity director wrote the letter l and then the letter i on a
scrap of paper. Or maybe more like a le. Like this.
	
	And again she wrote something on the scrap of paper.
			
				Le

	"The l is Archimboldi, the e is the late Mr. Bubis."

	Then the publicity director laughed and watched them for a
while, reclining in her swivel chair in silence. Later they talked to
the copy chief. She was about the same age as the publicity director
but not as cheery.
	
	She said yes, she had met Archimboldi many years ago, but she
didn't remember his face anymore, or what he was like, or any story
about him that would be worth telling.

She Couldn't remember the last time he was at the publishing house.

She advised them to speak to Mrs. Bubis, and then, without a word, she
busied herself editing a galley, answering the other copy editors'
questions, talking on the phone to people who might- Espinoza and
Pelletier thought with pity- be translators.

Before they left, refusing to be discouraged, they returned to
Schnell's office and talked to him about Archimboldian conferences and
colloquiums planned for the future. 

Schnell, attentive and cordial, told them they could count on him for
whatever they might need.

 				.				

Since they didn't have anything to do except wait for their flights
back to Paris and Madrid, Pelletier and Espinoza went walking around
Hamburg.

The walk inevitably took them to the district of streetwalkers and
peep shows, and then they both lapsed into gloom and began telling
each other stories of love and disillusionment.

Of course, they didn't give names or dates, they spoke in what might
be called abstract terms, but despite the seemingly detached
presentation of their misfortunes, the conversation and the walk only
sank them deeper into a state of melancholy, to such a degree that
after two hours they both felt as if they were suffocating.

	They took a taxi back to the hotel in silence.

	A surprise awaited them there. At the desk there was a note
from Schnell addressed to both of them, in which he explained that
after their conversation that morning he'd decided to talk to Mrs.
Bubis and she had agreed to see them.

The next morning, Espinoza and Pelletier called at the publisher's
apartment, on the third floor of an old building in Hamburg's upper
town.

As they waited they looked at the framed photographs on one wall. 

On the other two walls there were canvases by Soutine and Kandinsky,
and several drawings by Grosz, Kokoschka, and Ensor. 

But Espinoza and Pelletier were much more interested in the
Photographs, which were almost all of writers they disdained and
admired, and in any case had read: Thomas Mann with Bubis, Heinrich
Mann with Bubis, Klaus Mann with Bubis, Alfred Döblin with Bubis,
Herman Hesse with Bubis, Walter Benjamin with Bubis, Anna Seghers with
Bubis, Stefan Zewig with Bubis, Bertolt Brecht with Bubis,
Feuchtwanger with Bubis, Joannes Becher with Bubis, Oskar Maria Graf
with Bubis, bodies and faces and vague scenery, beautifully framed.

With the innocence of the dead, who no longer mind being observed, the
people in the photographs gazed out on the professors' barely
contained enthusiasm.

When Mrs. Bubis appeared, the two of them had their heads together
trying to decide whether a man next to Bubis was Fallada or not. 

	Indeed, it is Fallada, said Mrs. Bubis. 

	When they arrived, Pelletier and Espinoza saw an older woman in 
a white blouse and black skirt, a woman with a figure like Marlene 
Dietrich, as Pelletier would say much later, a woman who despite her years 
was still as strong willed as ever, a woman who didn't cling to the edge of 
the abyss but plunged into it with curiosity and elegance.

A woman who plunged into the abyss sitting down.

	"My husband knew all the German writers and the German writers
loved and respected my husband, even if a few of them said horrible
things about him later that weren't always even accurate," said Mrs.
Bubis, with a smile.

	They talked about Archimboldi and Mrs. Bubis had tea and cakes
brought in, although she drank vodka, which surprised Espinoza and
Pelletier, not that she would start a drink so early, but that she
wouldn't offer them a drink too, a drink they would in any case have
refused.

	"The only person at the press who knew Archimboldi's work to
perfection to perfection," said Mrs. Bubis, "was Mr. Bubis who
published all his books."

	But she asked herself (and by extension, the two of them) how
well anyone could really know another person's work.

	"For example, I love Grosz's work," she said, gesturing toward
the Grosz drawings on the wall, "but do I really know it?" His stories
make me laugh, often I think Grosz drew what he did to make me laugh,
sometimes I laugh to the point of hilarity, and hilarity becomes
helpless mirth, but once I met an art critic who of course liked
Grosz, and who nevertheless got very depressed when he attended  a
retrospective of his work or had to study some canvas or drawing in a
professional capacity.

And these bouts of depression or sadness would last for weeks. 

This art critic was a friend, but we'd never discussed Grosz.

Once, however, I mentioned the effect Grosz had on me.

At first he refused to believe me.

Then he started to shake his head.

Then he looked me up and down as if he'd never laid eyes on me before.

I thought he'd gone mad.

That was the end of our friendship.

Awhile ago I was told that he still says I know nothing about Grosz
and I have the aesthetic sense of a cow.

Well, as far as I'm concerned he can say whatever he likes.

Grosz makes me laugh, Grosz depresses him, but who can say they really
know Grosz?

	"Let's suppose," said Mrs. Bubis, "that at this very moment
there's a knock on the door and my old friend the art critic comes in.
He sits here on the sofa beside me, and one of you brings out an
unsigned drawing and tells us it's by Grosz and you want to sell it.

I look at the drawing and smile and I take out my checkbook and buy
it.

The art critic looks at the drawing and isn't depressed and tries to
make me reconsider.

He thinks it isn't a Grosz. 

I think it is.

Which of us is right?

	"Or let's tell the story a different way. You," said Mrs.
Bubis, pointing to Espinoza an unsigned drawing and say it's by Grosz
and try to sell it.

I don't laugh. 

I look at it coldly, I appreciate the line, the control, the satire,
but nothing about it tickles me.

The art critic examines it carefully and gets depressed, in his normal
way, and then there he makes an offer, an offer that exceeds his
savings, and that if accepted will condemn him to endless afternoons
of melancholy.

I try to change his mind.

I tell him the drawing strikes me as suspicious because it doesn't
make me laugh.

The critic says finally I'm looking at Grosz like an adult and gives
me his congratulations. 

Which of the two of us is right?"

				.

Then they went back to talking about Archimboldi and Mrs. Bubis
showed them a very odd review that had appeared in a Berlin newspaper
after the publication of Lüdicke, Archimboldi's first novel.

The review, by someone named Schleiermacher, tried to sum up the
novelist's personality in a few words.

	Intelligence: average.
	Character: epileptic.
	Scholarship: sloppy.
	Storytelling ability: chaotic.
	Prosody: chaotic.
	German usage: chaotic.

	Average intelligence and sloppy scholarship are easy to
understand. What did he mean by epileptic character, though? that
Archimboldi had epilepsy? that he wasn't right in the head? that he
suffered attacks of a mysterious nature? that he was a compulsive
reader of Dostoevsky? There were no physical description of the writer
in the piece.

	"We never knew who this man Schleiermacher was," said Mrs.
Bubis, "and sometimes my late husband would joke that Archimboldi
himself had written the review. But he knew as well I did that it
wasn't ture."

	Near midday, when it was time to leave, Pelletier and Espinoza
dared to ask the only question they thought really mattered: could she
help them get in touch with Archimboldi? Mrs. Bubis's eyes lit up. 

As if she were at the scene of a fire, Pelletier told Liz Norton
later. Not a raging blaze, but a fire that was abot to go out, after
burning for months. 

Her no came as a slight shake of the head that made Pellteier
and Espinoza abruptly aware of the futility of their plea. 

	Still, they stayed a while longer. 

From somewhere in the house came the muted strains of an Italian
popular song. 

Espinoza asked whether she knew Archimboldi, whether she had ever seen
him in person while her husband was alive.

Mrs. Bubis said she had and then, under her breath, she sang the
song's final chorus. 

Her Italian, according to the two friends, was very good.

	"What is Archimboldi like?" asked Espinoza.

	"Very tall," said Mts. Bubis, "very tall, a man of truly a
great height. If he'd been born in this day and age he likely would
have played basketball."

	Although by the way she said it, Archimboldi might as well
have been a dwarf. 

In the taxi back to the hotel the two friends thought about Grosz and
about, Mrs. Bubis' cruel, crystalline laugh and about the impression
left by that house full of photographs, where nevertheless the
photograph of the only writer they cared about was missing. 

And although neither wanted to admit it, both believe (or sensed) that
the flash of insight granted to them in the red-light district was
more important than any revelation they might have scented as guests
of Mrs. Bubis.

				.

In a word, and bluntly: as they walked around Sankt Pauli, it came to
Pelletier and Espinoza that the search for Archimboldi could never
fill their lives.

They could read him, they could study him, they could pick him apart,
but they couldn't laugh or be sad with him, partly because Archimboldi
was always far away, partly because the deeper they went into his
work, the more it devoured its explorers.

In a word: in Sankt Pauli and later at Mrs. Bubis's house, hung with
the photographs of the late Mrs. Bubis and his writers, Pelletier and
Espinoza understood that what they wanted to make was love, not war.

				.

That afternoon, and without indulging in any confidences beyond the
strictly necessary- confidences in general, or maybe abstract, terms-
they shared another taxi to the airport, and as they waited for their
planes, they talked about love, about the need for love.

Pelletier was the first to go.

When Espinoza was left alone (his flight was an hour later), his
thoughts turned to Liz Norton and his real chances of wooing her.

He imagined her, and then imagined himself, side by side, sharing an
apartment in Madrid, going to the supermarket, both of them working in
the German department. 

He imagined his office and her office, separated by a wall, and nights
in Madrid next to her, eating with friends at good restaurants, and,
back at home, an enormous bathtub, an enormous bed.

				.

But Pelletier got there first. 

Three days after the meeting with Archimboldi's publisher, he showed
up in London unannounced, and after telling Liz Norton the greatest
news, he invited her to dinner at a restaurant in Hammersmith, that a
colleague in the Russian department had recommended, where they ate
goulash and chickpea puree with beets and fish macerated in lemon with
yoghurt, a dinner with candles and violins and real Russian waiters
and Irish waiters disguised as Russians, all of it excessive from any
point of view, and somewhat rustic and dubious from a gastronomic
point of view, and they had vodka with their dinner
